Authentication and authorization
================================

DataONE specifies a security model for Member Nodes. The model covers most
aspects of how clients authenticate and which content they are authorized for.
Some aspects are left open for Member Nodes to implement as best fits their
requirements.

This section outlines the main aspects of how authentication and authorization
is implemented in GMN and how to configure GMN and clients. In-depth coverage
of these topics is provided in the `DataONE architecture documentation
<http://mule1.dataone.org/ArchitectureDocs-current/index.html>`_.


Authentication
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In DataONE, authentication is the process of confirming the identity claimed by
a person or system that connects to a node in order to call the node's DataONE
REST API methods.

A person or system can connect to a node without claiming an identity. This is
done by connecting via HTTPS (or HTTP for Tier 1 nodes) without providing a
:term:`X.509` (SSL) :term:`client side certificate`. In this case, the
connection is granted access only to publicly available APIs and objects.

To claim an identity, the person or system connects with a client side
certificate. The certificate must be issued by a :term:`CA` that is trusted by
the node. A DataONE compliant serialization of the certificate :term:`DN`
becomes the primary DataONE subject. The certificate can also contain an X.509
v3 extension that hold additional DataONE subjects in the form of equivalent
identities and group memberships.

When a node first receives an incoming connection with a client side
certificate, it does basic validation of the certificate itself. This includes
checking that the certificate was issued by a trusted CA, that it has not
expired, has not been revoked and has not been tampered with. After the
certificate has passed these tests, the node extracts the primary subject and
any other subjects from the certificate. These become the authenticated subjects
for the connection and authentication is complete.

GMN uses Apache for performing the basic validation of the certificate. If
a certificate is provided but is invalid, Apache will return an error to the
client, indicating why the certificate failed validation and will then terminate
the connection.


Authorization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In DataONE, authorization is the process of confirming that an authenticated
subject has access to a DataONE REST API method or object. Authorization happens
each time a REST API call is made. When the call is made, the node will look at
the list of authenticated subjects that is associated with the connection
through which the call was made. If the list of authenticated subjects does not
include a subject to which access to the REST API method has been granted,
authorization is denied and GMN returns a 401 NotAuthorized exception to the
client.

.. _crud_perm:

Permissions for create, update and delete
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

DataONE does not specify how Member Nodes should control access to the APIs
that allow users to create, update and delete contents on the node. GMN controls
the access to these APIs with a whitelist. If a subject that is not in the
whitelist attempts to call, for instance, ``MNStorage.create()``, GMN will
return a DataONE exception such as this (formatted for readability)::

  Exception: NotAuthorized
  errorCode: 401
  detailCode: 0
  description:
    Access allowed only for subjects with Create/Update/Delete permission.
    Active subjects:
      authenticatedUser (equivalent),
      public (equivalent),
      CN=First Last,O=Google,C=US,DC=cilogon,DC=org (primary)

This means that the connection was made with a certificate in which the subject
was ``CN=First Last,O=Google,C=US,DC=cilogon,DC=org`` and that this subject was
not in GMNs whitelist for create, update and delete.

To create a whitelist with this subject, first create a file, for instance,
``whitelist.txt``. The most convenient location for this file is in the
``service`` folder::

  $ sudo su gmn
  $ cd /var/local/dataone/gmn/lib/python2.7/site-packages/service
  $ nano whitelist.txt

In this file, add a line with an exact copy of the subject string marked as
``primary`` in the NotAuthorized exception (``CN=First
Last,O=Google,C=US,DC=cilogon,DC=org`` in this case).

Blank lines and lines starting with "#" are ignored in the whitelist file,
allowing comments. The remaining lines must each contain a separate subject.

Then, add the entries in the whitelist text file to GMN's database with the
following command::

  $ python manage.py set_whitelist whitelist.txt

Any existing subjects in the database are cleared before adding the subjects
from the whitelist file. So subjects can be added or removed from the whitelist
by adding or removing them in the file and then synchronizing with the database
by running the command above.


Creating authenticated connections to your Node
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create an authenticated connection to your Node, you must connect over HTTPS
and provide a client side certificate. For a stand-alone node, only the local CA
is trusted by default. So only certificates issued by this CA can be used. If
the GMN instance is joined to DataONE, it is set up to also trust certificates
issued by CILogon and DataONE.

In addition, the certificate must be for a subject that has the rights required
for performing the operation(s) the client intends to perform after connecting.
For instance, GMN requires that the subject used in connections that create
content on the Node validate against an internal :ref:`whitelist <crud_perm>`.

For automated tasks, certificates issued by the local CA are preferred. DataONE
does not issue certificates for clients, so cannot be used for this purpose and
certificates issued by CILogon are secured by having a time limit of 18 hours,
making them unsuitable for automated tasks.

When running as a regular user, the local CA must be used for a stand-alone
instance. The local CA can also be used for a public instance but CILogon is a
more secure choice due to the 18 hour expiration time.


Authenticating without a certificate
------------------------------------

In a stand-alone testing environment, where network access to the GMN instance
is strictly limited, it is possible to simply add ``public`` to the
:ref:`whitelist for create, update and delete <crud_perm>`. Because the public
subject is assigned to all connections, this allows access to create, update and
delete objects on the node without any authentication.

Thus, this mode allows modifying node contents when connecting entirely without
a certificate. It also lets GMN be set up for access over regular HTTP.


Authenticating with any trusted certificate
-------------------------------------------

Connections that are made with any certificate that is trusted by GMN are
assigned the ``authenticatedUser`` subject. So, adding this subject to the
:ref:`whitelist for create, update and delete <crud_perm>` enables anyone that
connects with a trusted certificate to alter content on the Node. This is highly
insecure if the Node is set up to trust CILogon, as anyone can obtain a CILogon
certificate through OpenID. However, it may be useful if the node exposes only
public objects and so, does not need to trust CILogon.
