In the mockups, filter operations and filter values are prefixed with "@" and
"#" respectively. These decorators have two purposes. The first is to cause
filter operations, filter values and results from previously applied filters to
be displayed as separate groups in the filesystem when the files and folders are
sorted alphabetically. The second is to make it easier for ONEDrive to parse the
path when the file and folder names are returned to ONEDrive as path elements by
the client. The filesystem path serves as the only channel of communication from
the client to ONEDrive and there is no opportunity to do interpretation or
translation on the client. Without the decorations, ONEDrive would have to keep
track of more context to determine the semantics embedded in the path.


Member Node

Member Node filtering fits well in the filesystem. The mockup exposes it as a
@MemberNode folder that appears in all folders in which a new filter can be
started. Opening the folder exposes a list of Member Nodes. Selecting a Member
Node applies the filter and brings the user back to a folder in which the
resulting objects appear and the @MemberNode filter is no longer available. We
can also implement an "OR" filter by leaving the Member Node filter available to
be selected again.

Geographical Area

ONEMercury exposes the geographical area search in two ways, as names of
continents/states/countries and as a bounding box defined by latitude and
longitude. The first type maps pretty well to the folder hierarchy and the
mockup exposes it as two hierarchies, one which allows the user to first select
a continent then a state/country in that continent and another that allows
selecting a state/country directly. Letting the user select latitude and
longitude floating point numbers in a filesystem is tricky. It might involve
having the user open one folder for each digit. Letting the user select the
coordinates as degrees, minutes and seconds is more feasible. We could expose a
system which lets the user define coordinates only to the granularity that they
need. The user would first select the degrees for upper left and lower right
coordinates in a list of numbers between 0 and 359. Then, if they wish, they can
refine that by selecting the minutes in a list between 0 and 59, then the same
for seconds. Also, only the numbers for which there are actually results within
the currently filtered objects are displayed. The mockup illustrates these idea.

Keyword

The only way to let the user type a keyword in filesystem based search/discovery
would be to have them type it directly into the path, which I don't think is
feasible. So the mockup shows a system where the user must know up front which
keyword he wants. The idea is to have the user click through a hierarchy of
groups until there are few enough keywords that they can be displayed directly
in a list. The groups are displayed as folders named after the first and last
keyword in the group. If the keyword filter is the first one that the user
applies, my guess is that it will normally be 2-3 levels deep. If the keyword
filter is applied after other filters, it may be just 0 or 1 levels deep (where
0 levels means that the keywords are displayed directly, without having to
select groups first).

Date-time filtering

Date-time filtering is implemented in a way similar to the bounding box
geographical area filtering. The goal is have the user filter only to the
granularity that they need and select only from date-times for which there are
existing objects. So a user that is searching for data up to and including 2005
can select @EndYear/#2005, but does not have to refine with month and day
selections and if the current set of objects contain data only up to January and
February 2005, only those months are displayed, with the same for year and day
(Solr faceting is used for retrieving the options in a single query). The mockup
illustrates this and shows how to make the user aware that refinements are
available but optional. This is done by displaying the currently filtered list
of objects plus other options for filtering together with each optional
date-time refinement step.

As both start and end date-time filtering is available and objects can contain
data for a period of time, I think that filtering should be applied in such a
way that objects that contain data for a time period that has any overlap with
the specified start and end date-time filter should be included in the filter.
So, for instance, an object with data for 2005-2007 would be included in a
search for objects for 2000-2005. And objects with data for 2000-2010 would be
included in a search for objects for 2005.

From an implementation standpoint, the mockup also shows how ONEDrive can parse
the path in such a way that an optional elements in the path are seen in the
context of earlier elements.

Data package

The data package mockup aims to show the following:

- When a data package folder is opened, the entire contents of the package can
  be exposed as a bagit or zip file.
- The same object can be exposed in multipe formats. For instance, an EML file
  may also be exposed as an HTML file.
- The system metadata for all the objects is in a separate folder in order to
  keep the main folder from getting too crowded.

Transformations can be implemented as CN services or can be implemented directly
in ONEDrive, maybe as a plugin system.
